Today's episode is sponsored by
data dog a cloud scale
monitoring platform that unifies metrics
traces logs and more in
a single pane of glass
automatically alert on performance anomalies
easily build custom dashboards and
collaborate to resolve issues and
real-time. Try data dog for
yourself with a free 14-day.
Trial Hansel minutes listeners will
also receive a free t-shirt.
Visit bitly.com /data dog shirt.
That's SBI tly.com data dog
shirt to get started just
got hassling. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
today I'm talking with Michelle
son. She is the author
of first time coders definitive
guide to coding for children.
You can a guest instructor
at MIT and has done.
Master trainer program. How are
you? Good. Thanks for having
me Scott. Yeah, I always
love talking to people who
are excited as I am
to teach kids how to
code and when I was
reading first time coders that
folks can go ahead and
check out in the show
notes and you can buy
it at bookstores and online
everywhere. You call out a
number of things like there's
the fact that everyone wants
their kids to code. But
you also talked about we
have digital devices in every
Every kid's hands we worry
about screen time and you're
thinking maybe maybe we can
turn that around and screen
time isn't such a bad
thing. Definitely. Yeah, when we
look at the kids these
days that their childhood is
really surrounded by digital devices
be it the iPad or
tablet or smart phones and
a lot of times they
interact with it when they
see their parents using it
or their sibling using it
and they turn them into
game. Devices is very easy
for them to download or
play with games that are
already loaded on the phone
or use it to watch
videos on YouTube or other
video platforms and it became
an entertainment place for them
to go to whereas for
children. They are full of
creativity and they always want
to Tinker with things and
draw things or built things
using very hands on. On
experience and the good news.
Is that the past few
years. There are so many
tools out there that is
turning coding into such a
accessible thing for even a
child as young as four
years old can start to
learn how to code and
so by introducing them simple
coding Concepts. We are essentially
giving them back that creative
power onto. When they interact
with the digital devices interesting,
so you call out a
couple of interesting examples in
the book. You mentioned like
Bill Gates, you know, many
years ago and his kids
were younger had very strict
limits Steve Jobs kids didn't
let them have an iPad
when it came out but
you're saying that rather than
turning them into kind of
mindless consumers. We turn them
into creators by being more
flexible about screen time, but
we make them we allow
them rather to create and
code using those devices. Yeah,
definitely. And the main thing
that I think is important
when handling screen time with
young children is really to
differentiate their time spent in
front of the screen into
creative and passive uses. So
passive uses. It's like, okay
like looking at the screen
and playing playing yet another
round of games for the
10th or 20th time or
watching videos that are just
Funny or kind of like
entertainment uses. Whereas creative use
could be you know coding
is one of them and
the other one could be,
you know, simply editing videos
or editing photos something or
even creating illustration on the
iPad. So all these things
are like the creative use
is very beneficial for a
young young child's development. Whereas
the passive Use is purely
entertainment you so by teaching
them this differentiation. I believe
is more empowering than you
know, strictly saying. Oh well,
you know no screen time
and then, you know, once
they grew up to a
certain age and the floodgates
open and they certainly can
use the computer then they
they wouldn't know what to
do with it and they
would need to learn that
eventually as well now, I
think that's an interesting point.
Well, I don't think we
We don't technically or often
think of like making music
with GarageBand or playing with
iMovie as being coating. It
is structured system, you know
systemic thinking, you know it
again it is initially coding
but if you start making
really complicated videos or content,
you're doing quite a bit
of work to do that
and that is using the
brain probably the same part
of the brain as one
would use if you were
actually writing code. Yeah, so
that active engagement we know
that is is is a
reasonable thing, but it's worth
pointing out and you call
this out in the book
that you know, a lot
of parents they feel guilty
because they're using it as
a babysitter. There's a lot
of anxiety about it and
we're all making this up
as we go along right
like we're good to let
our kids watch Sesame Street,
but I don't know what
they're doing on the on
the iPad and I don't
want to be lazy. I
don't want to catch myself
into letting the kids beyond
that for hours just because
I need a break and
it's really I see that
as like every generation. There's
like a new tool that's
out there. Or I think
when the television first came
out like those all these
paranoia about like, okay whether
this is something we should
bring into the house and
so technology is really like
a tool that we can
use it for our benefit
or detriment and so it's
it's really about knowing what
we want to get out
of it. And there's you
know, sometimes there's nothing wrong
with enjoying a video, you
know to relax and I
think teaching our children to
be Mindfully consuming or mindfully
spending time with technology is
it's very crucial. You also
call out and I think
it's really cool that you
bring this up is that
kids move through different developmental
stages. And if you try
to teach a four-year-old python
that four-year-olds probably going to
just hate computers and think
oh computer suck on and
then there you're going to
turn them off on the
entire topic, right? So you
do point that out. Yeah.
Yeah and and coding is
a challenging. Subject for a
lot of parents to approach
for their their children because
you know, not a lot
of parents know how to
code and if you didn't
learn it, even if some
of some of us learned
it in University like the
language is so different, you
know in there in this
generation and probably evolved a
lot as well. So so
it is it is different
from subjects like math or
English or you know some
Objects that we learned and
probably like the math and
English haven't been updated like
the rules in the languages
and map hasn't been updated
for four decades. So so
for coding sometimes we see
parents come to us and
say well, you know python
is used by all these
big companies like Facebook and
Google and so I want
my child to start learning
python as soon as possible
and I think the essential
things Remember here is that
coding is like there's so
many different languages and the
languages are always evolving and
always there's always new languages
being developed and released and
so for four year old
that started learning coding today
when they graduated from University
and going into the workforce.
They're probably using very different
languages already for a computer.
Programming languages. So the lesson
of the story here is
that instead of fixating into
one particular language choosing an
age appropriate language is really
important because it teaches the
foundation the fundamentals of what
programming means and the concepts
that are the computer science
Concepts that are pretty much
very Universal across different languages.
So What we see is
that for children that have
a good foundation of their
first language. They go on
and pick up the second
and the third language much
faster and also they can
grab the new languages much
more solidly interesting that that
I feel like and I've
talked about this before and
I'm curious what you think
that there is a direct
parallel between learning a computer
language and learning a language
to speak and you just
gave the example where a
parent maybe even a non-technical
parent might say well pythons
popular. We should learn python
just like I'm sure thousands
of American parents are saying
well Chinese is useful or
Spanish is useful. Our kids
should learn that therefore they
will be more marketable. I
guess that we ought to
get a job, but the
same thing applies in programming
that there's always going to
be new languages and you
know, it was Japanese in
the 80s and it's Chinese
today at Spanish tomorrow. Maybe
we need to teach them
how to learn languages how
to decompose problems. You know,
I can't let you talk
about computational thinking that's more
important than And just memorizing
syntax. Definitely. Yeah, I think
coding is the greatest one
of the greatest way to
counter the rote learning and
the you know, simply remember
Rising type of learning process
that is quite common in
in the previous generation of
learning and you know, I
think schools and educators are
you know now ting to
think about ways to teach
children in more problem solving
ways and to break down
problems and apply their creative
thinking to generate Solutions and
coding Falls right into this
category where you know, if
anyone who has learned certain
code certain amount of coding
before knows that there's very
little amount of memorization that
is needed because the syntax
Or the even the library
documentation is all online and
you know, sometimes we we
tell them the students that
you know, a big part
of knowing how to code
is also knowing what to
search on Google. So so
knowing where to find the
knowledge and knowing how to
bridge your the Gap in
the coding knowledge is really
key and on and and
together with that. That is
that you know, when it
comes to coding what we're
really hoping for students to
learn is really how to
think like a computer scientist.
So computational thinking which is
really like a fancy word
for problem solving and so
there's four key elements in
computational thinking first is the
decomposition so breaking down the
problem and the second one
is pattern recognition. So look,
At how similar or whether
there's any patterns in the
problem and then abstracting. So
abstraction is the third step
which is to start thinking
about OK. How do I
formulate a solution that could
be applied to more different
similar problems in the future
and then generate an algorithm
to to to solve the
problem. So so this is
this this computational thinking process
is applicable regardless of any
what language what computation programming
language someone is using and
and actually more more broadly.
It can be applied to
even non-programmers right like so
if someone is designing in
an organization in in a
fast growing company, they might
need to look at you
know. Using computational thinking to
break down that decomposing the
problem that in front of
them and then psycho through
the four steps and eventually
come up with solution. So
we see that coding, you
know, certainly there's a lot
of interest in the technology
space now and a lot
of parents now want their
like Aspire for their children
to become the next maybe
Mark Zuckerberg or or Steve
Jobs and to be the
tech entrepreneur becoming a very
common aspiration for young children
nowadays, but at the same
time I think coding is
really much more than that.
It's like a way to
teach students how to think
and how to solve problems.
So even if their career
in the future doesn't lead
to you know, they probably
maybe they never code anymore
the thinking process they learn
from being a coder. From
building things using software and
writing programs. It's still a
healthful thinking process that they
learn and they can apply
to various jobs. Yeah, one
of the examples that I
try to explain to my
kids is that when you
know, they can get around
with Uber or Lyft today,
but I still want them
to know how to change
the oil and change a
tire but the fact is
I haven't personally changed a
tire and 15 years, but
the the skill was was
fundamental to understanding how cars
move and everyone should change
a tire once even if
you ride the bus the
rest of your life totally.
Yeah, that's a great example.
And I think that also
is about, you know, having
that Curiosity and have like
understanding how things work around
around us and technology is
such an intertwined aspect of
Our Lives now right is
where we cannot shut it
down and and I think
eventually you know, there's like
I think there's no certain.
There's no best time to
say. Okay. This is the
time age where it's good
to start looking at screens
or start introducing coding at
the same time. Like, you
know, I think coding once
is a helpful tool to
help children in this generation
to see the world in
a more informed way to
understand. Oh, you know, like
I've built you know, A
Maps like, you know a
travel app for my for
my friends in this coding
class and and then when
they download an app that
is related to that and
they kind of see in
a more creators mindset and
rather than just a user
at the at the other
end. So I think that
part is also very powerful.
Yeah. Hey friends. Let's thank
our new sponsor. Have you?
The Uno platform yet Uno
platform is the open source
platform for building native Mobile
Windows and webassembly apps it's
tested on over 200 real-life
projects. You can build performance
single code base cross-platform line
of business apps today. Now,
I realize it sounds unbelievable.
So I'll say it again
single codebase native mobile desktop
or web apps and you're
using only xaml and c-sharp.
Nothing else is needed. There's
Visual Studio support a Vibrant
Community using she sharpens Mo
gives you skill and tooling
reuse check it out at
platform dot U, n-- Oh
that's platform dot. You know,
I also think that the
point you make about willingness
to learn like jumping into
programming can be very intimidating
and if we can get
kids early to believe that
they can do something that
sense of power is important.
Otherwise We will end up
self-selecting and ending up with
just a certain kind of
personality in programming, you know,
you don't want to teach
a four-year-old at math is
hard and get that tape
in the back of their
head. Like oh math is
hard math isn't for me.
We certainly don't want people
to be thinking computers aren't
for me. Yeah, exactly. It's
such a big it's almost
like that's like everything that's
around our lives. And you
know, our smartphone is just
a small computer on our
hands. And so and I
think that really Brings back
the the importance of choosing
something choosing tools that are
age-appropriate and and stick with
it for perhaps a little
bit longer than an like
a kid or even the
parent think is is feels
like it and so one
example would be for Scratch,
which is a tool that
we introduced for the six
to eight years old. We
recommend that for students that
age group and You know,
we have we have two
we usually see students that
go through the entire Academic
Year, you know once a
week type of thing and
to go through the same
tool like scratch all over
and and it's very easy
to say. Oh, well, you
know, they've done once one
semester or scratch like what
about you know pythonic so
there's always python the thing
about jumping from one language
to the other is that
We always say that is
you rather go deep in
one language and really understand
like it's so powerful like
each language. You can create
so many different projects. There's
so much fun that you
know, not just kids but
even adults can can have
fun on these Platforms in
so many different ways. So
so sometimes one of the
key things that we see
that prevents a student from
learning fully the language is
to move on too quickly
and to feel the urge
to almost like collect collection
of language that they know
and each of them maybe
know a little bit but
not too much. So we
see much more positive results
when a student learn something
learn one language really well
and create, you know, maybe
30 different. X and and
then they are very capable
and very confident about picking
up the second language. Now
one of the things that
I really appreciated about your
book is that you call
out that no one language
is superior to another, you
know, a lot of books
like this could make a
big declaration and they would
say You Must Learn Python.
That's the language that your
kids need and and you
call out pick a language.
Here's you know, here's five
or six. Here's what they're
good for. But when you
do pick one stick with
it, right don't bounce the
kids around a different languages
just pick one get good
at it and then learn
as many as you can
as many as make you
happy. Yep. Definitely. Yeah, these
things are really important and
I appreciate it all so
that I may be you
plan this did you write
your book in such a
way that you weren't writing
it for parents that are
programmers. This seems like a
book that I could recommend
to someone who is a
parent but isn't a programmer.
This is for regular people.
Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. I think
you know, the one of
the things I've noticed when
it comes to learn teaching
kids to code is that
it's so challenging for parents
who haven't had that exposure
before and didn't know how
to code and it's almost
that they are also curious
themselves and they believe that
it's an important thing with
for their children to learn
at the same time. It's
not like math or English
or any other subject or
even like Like science that
they've kind of learned in
school, even though maybe they
don't use in at work
anymore. Like they kind of
remember certain things here and
there with coding is really
like almost a black hole
where they're like, well, I
have no idea what coding
is. So so part of
the one of the goals
for this book is to
really did mystify coding learning
for young children. To the
parents that don't necessarily know
what coding is and hopefully,
you know, the way that
the book is written it
because it makes coding as
a subject much more approachable
for parents and and you
know some of the projects
on for the different age
groups. We hope that the
parents even even for the
those who don't know how
to code can can read
through it and can follow
it and work on it
next to their kids. It's
maybe it's just for for
our family evening or weekend
activity and we've done similar
workshops for like in-person workshops
for parents and their child
as well. And it's it's
very engaging. It's actually a
very fun bonding experience because
I think sometimes computers or
digital devices are more of
a separating energy in the
household. Let's say after dinner.
You know, let's say Mom
and Dad might be, you
know, both on their phones
on the couch or something
and then the kid is
playing on the iPad. And
so everyone is like in
their own worlds. And and
so that's one case and
the other case sometimes would
be when sometimes that happens
for children that are slightly
older when they start to
use the computer to do
homework or they have they
have you know, the one
laptop policy. A kid at
school and they kind of
start to have this tension
in the home. That's that's
like for example dad might
say oh, why are you
on the computer again? Like
are you playing games that
is you know, you have
screen time limits, right? And
so sometimes we see that
technology in the household becomes
such a tension or or
at least like making family
members not as communicative and
so hopefully for this book,
It can serve as an
activity idea for families to
to to use technology as
well together and and parents
can learn something new. And
of course, I hopefully the
child also can can pick
up something as well through
some of the exercises in
the book. Right? But you're
explicitly calling out the idea
that we can choose to
let this thing be a
thing that we control and
that rips us apart and
it keeps us separate or
we can be intentional about
how we use technology try
to make our kids creators
not consumers or at least
not passive consumers and in
doing so bring the family
together rather than taking it
apart. Yeah, and it's such
a fun thing to do
that. You know, I think
for the students for students
that have been learning for
a little longer and they
start to learn, you know,
building apps or building websites
and really starting to build
things with JavaScript or Python
and they can start to
really build Oceans for the
family right? So one of
the examples I quoted in
the book is one of
our students there who has
three she has four siblings.
So if a big family
and one of her end-of-year
project was to build a
family calendar app for her
mom or well for her
family because her mom has
been using a giant sheet
of paper that is stuck
on the wall of the
kitchen. Kitchen to keep track
of every single person's schedule
and every week she would
drop something like a new
piece of paper and manually
write down on the wall.
And so her a bit
became something that really is
very personal right like probably
she can put it on
the App Store and for
other, you know, seven seven
people family to download, but
it's really intended for there.
Her her own family. And
and I think that is
usually one of the best
starting point for students that
are starting to be able
to create websites or apps
which is to solve solve
a problem. That is so
close to them. You know,
it is their personal problem
something that can help their
family their friends themselves and
making that really make technology
much more of a a
daily thing that and it
is very empowering to for
for students to see that
while I can create something
that makes my life better.
My family's life better in
the even like a very
small way and it's fun
to do that. Exactly and
I appreciate that because I
think what you're saying is
that we need to have
the kids only be intentional
but be problem solvers right?
You are more powerful when
you can look at your
world and say hook mom
has it. Problem or Mom
can say I've got a
problem maybe the kids can
can solve that. They can
write an app or something
and in part 2 of
your book you actually specifically
call out different age groups
and I like the way
you made a taxonomy around
this when they're four or
five they play when they're
six to eight. They Tinker
tweens nine ten, eleven love
their games, but then 12
and up, you know, you
can really start thinking about
apps you can start solving
real problems. Yeah, and that
really brings back the The
idea of seeing the world
in a different light where
I think you know, there's
one way to experience the
world would be like, okay.
Well all these infrastructures built
for us, like for example,
you mentioned like uber and
Lyft like, okay. Well great
like so convenient for for
us to get around the
city and you know, that
is something that and knowing
how to code and having
the experience of building things
really bring into Different perspective
of while you know, somebody
built this and you know,
that's that's amazing. And also,
you know, what are the
complexity that goes behind that
and having that Curiosity to
ask these questions, right? And
when you say you see
an application and you say
somebody built this I think
the next question that I
want my kid to say
is why wasn't it me
like why not me please?
Yeah, that's that sense of
power that we want folks
to have. So first time
coders folks can go and
find it. They can look
in the show notes. I'll
make sure we have links
to Goodreads and all over
the place. It's from line
Crest publishing. But you also
have an organization that teaches
kids in person. Is that
correct? Yes. Yeah. So first
code academy and I started
the company six years ago
and back in 2013. And
yeah, so that is really
the inspiration behind the book
where you know through With
probably tens of thousands of
Barons over the years. We
just like I just see
so many of these questions
come up from you know,
very keen parents that want
to bring bring their kids
to learn this important topic
of coding and technology and
and and hopefully this book
can can address some of
these questions and make it
fun for both the the
Aaron and the parents in
the process of learning to
code. Hmm. And first code
academy is right now in
Hong Kong Singapore Taiwan and
Macau. Are you moving that
to the West as well?
Yeah, so we're starting to
offer online classes as well.
And so yeah stay tuned
for that. Very cool. Well,
thanks so much Michelle son
for chatting with me today
about your book first time
coders. Thank you so much
Scott. This has been another
episode of handsome minutes, and
we'll see you again next
week.